# Bug MDEV-19535

## Description

### Isolation levels

| Isolation level    | Bug manifests |
|--------------------|---------------|
| `READ UNCOMMITTED` | No            |
| `READ COMMITTED`   | No            |
| `REPEATABLE READ`  | Yes           |
| `SERIALIZABLE`     | Yes           |

### Database and version

The bug manifests on the **_MariaDB_** DBMS.

The version of the database used for replicating the bug is `10.4.5`, and the bug was fixed in `10.4.6`, but the bug is also present in earlier versions of the DBMS.

## Bug explanation

The bug relies on the compatibility mode of **_MariaDB_**, by setting the `SQL_MODE` variable. The primary usecase is migrating from another DBMS such as **_Oracle_** or **_MySQL_**, making **_MariaDB_** emulate the behaviour of the source DBMS.

More details on the `SQL_MODE` variable can be found in the [documentation](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/sql-mode/).

The bug manifests when the `SQL_MODE` variable is set to `ORACLE`. This causes a `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE` statement to skip row locking, and makes a concurent transaction read stale data.

The bug is similar to the following code:
```SQL
conn_0> SET SQL_MODE = 'ORACLE';    -- Set ORACLE compatibility mode.
conn_0> START TRANSACTION;
conn_0> SELECT * FROM t FOR UPDATE; -- First transaction should lock rows of t.
conn_1> SELECT * FROM t;            -- Not blocked, second transaction reads stale data.
conn_0> UPDATE t SET a = a + 1;     -- First transaction updates t.
conn_0> COMMIT;
```

## Bug cause

For properly parsing **_Oracle_** SQL statements, a different parsing grammar is used. The standard grammar is defined in `sql/sql_yacc.yy`, and the Oracle grammar is defined in `sql/oracle_sql_yacc.yy`.

The later misses the following 2 lines:
```C++
if ($1->set_lock_to_the_last_select($3))
    MYSQL_YYABORT;
```

This 2 lines are the ones handling the low-level locking of the rows selected by the `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE` statement.

## Bug fix

Adding 2 lines to the Oracle grammar, as shown in the previous section, fixes the bug.

## Isolation levels

The bug manifests on the `REPEATABLE READ` and `SERIALIZABLE` isolation levels.

While the cause of the bug is isolation level agnostic, the bug is only visible when the isolation level is set to `REPEATABLE READ` or `SERIALIZABLE`, due to the isolation level constraints:

 * `READ UNCOMMITTED`: The second transaction can have dirty reads, making the bug invisible.
 * `READ COMMITTED`: Transactions do not hold exclusive locks on the rows they read, making the bug invisible.